Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts

Nelson F. Liu1∗ Kevin Lin2 John Hewitt1 Ashwin Paranjape3
Michele Bevilacqua3 Fabio Petroni3 Percy Liang1
1Stanford University 2University of California, Berkeley 3Samaya AI
nfliu@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
While recent language models have the ability
to take long contexts as input, relatively little
is known about how well the language models
use longer context. We analyze language model
performance on two tasks that require identifying relevant information within their input contexts: multi-document question answering and
key-value retrieval. We find that performance is
often highest when relevant information occurs
at the beginning or end of the input context,
and significantly degrades when models must
access relevant information in the middle of
long contexts. Furthermore, performance substantially decreases as the input context grows
longer, even for explicitly long-context models.
Our analysis provides a better understanding
of how language models use their input context and provides new evaluation protocols for
future long-context models.
1 Introduction
Language models have become an important and
flexible building block in a variety of user-facing
language technologies, including conversational
interfaces, search and summarization, and collaborative writing. These models perform downstream
tasks primarily via prompting: all relevant task
specification and data to process is formatted as
a textual context, and the model returns a generated text completion. These input contexts can
contain thousands of tokens, especially when using
language models on lengthy inputs (e.g., legal or
scientific documents, conversation histories, etc.)
or augmenting them with external information (e.g.,
relevant documents from a search engine, database
query results, etc; Petroni et al., 2020; Ram et al.,
2023; Shi et al., 2023; Mallen et al., 2023; Schick
et al., 2023, inter alia).
Handling these use-cases requires language models to successfully operate over long sequences.
*Work partially completed as an intern at Samaya AI.
1st 5th 10th 15th 20th
